Tao Te Ching
A New English Version,
    with Foreword and Notes,
    by Stephen Mitchell
TO VICKIWho can find a good woman ?
She is pr ecious beyond all things .
Her husband’ s heart trusts her completely .
She is his best r ewar d.
PROV . 31:10-1 1Contents
Foreword
1 The tao that can be told…
2 When people see some things as beautiful…
3 If you over esteem gr eat men…
4 The T ao is like a well…
5 The T ao doesn't take sides…
6 The T ao is called the Gr eat Mother…
7 The T ao is infinite, eternal…
8 The supr eme good is like water…
9 Fill your bowl to the brim…
10 Can you coax your mind fr om its wandering…
11 We join spokes together in a wheel…
12 Colors blind the eye…
13 Success is as danger ous as failur e…
14 Look, and it can't be seen…
15 The ancient Masters wer e profound and subtle…
16 Empty your mind of all thoughts…
17 When the Master governs, the people…
18 When the gr eat T ao is forgotten…
19 Thr ow away holiness and wisdom…20 Stop thinking, and end your pr oblems…
21 The Master keeps her mind…
22 If you want to become whole…
23 Expr ess yourself completely…
24 He who stands on tiptoe…
25 Ther e was something formless and perfect…
26 The heavy is the r oot of the light…
27 A good traveler has no fixed plans…
28 Know the male…
29 Do you want to impr ove the world…
30 Whoever r elies on the T ao in governing men…
31 W eapons ar e the tools of violence…
32 The T ao can't be per ceived…
33 Knowing others is intelligence…
34 The gr eat T ao flows everywher e…
35 She who is center ed in the T ao…
36 If you want to shrink something…
37 The T ao never does anything…
38 The Master doesn't try to be powerful…
39 In harmony with the T ao…
40 Return is the movement of the T ao…
41 When a superior man hears of the T ao…
42 The T ao gives birth to One…
43 The gentlest thing in the world…44 Fame or integrity: which is mor e important…
45 True perfection seems imperfect…
46 When a country is in harmony with the T ao…
47 W ithout opening your door…
48 In the pursuit of knowledge…
49 The Master has no mind of her own…
50 The Master gives himself up…
51 Every being in the universe…
52 In the beginning was the T ao…
53 The gr eat W ay is easy…
54 Whoever is planted in the T ao…
55 He who is in harmony with the T ao…
56 Those who know don't talk…
57 If you want to be a gr eat leader…
58 If a country is governed with tolerance…
59 For governing a country well…
60 Governing a large country…
61 When a country obtains gr eat power…
62 The T ao is the center of the universe…
63 Act without doing…
64 What is r ooted is easy to nourish…
65 The ancient Masters…
66 All str eams flow to the sea…
67 Some say that my teaching is nonsense…68 The best athlete…
69 The generals have a saying…
70 My teachings ar e easy to understand…
71 Not-knowing is true knowledge…
72 When they lose their sense of awe…
73 The T ao is always at ease…
74 If you r ealize that all things change…
75 When taxes ar e too high…
76 Men ar e born soft and supple…
77 As it acts in the world, the T ao…
78 Nothing in the world…
79 Failur e is an opportunity…
80 If a country is governed wisely…
81 True words ar en't eloquent…
Notes
Acknowledgments
About the T ranslator
Credits
Copyright
About the PublisherF o r e w o r d
Tao Te Ching  (pronounced, more or less, Dow Deh Jing ) can be translated
as The Book of the Immanence of the W ay or The Book of the W ay and of
How It Manifests Itself in the W orld or, simply , The Book of the W ay. Since
it is already well known by its Chinese title, I have let that stand.
About Lao-tzu, its author , there is practically nothing to be said. He may
have been an older contemporary of Confucius (551-479 B.C.E.) and may
have held the position of archive-keeper in one of the petty kingdoms of the
time. But all the information that has come down to us is highly suspect.
Even the meaning of his name is uncertain (the most likely interpretations:
“the Old Master” or , more picturesquely , “the Old Boy”). Like an Iroquois
woodsman, he left no traces. All he left us is his book: the classic manual
on the art of living, written in style of gemlike lucidity , radiant with humor
and grace and lar geheartedness and deep wisdom: one of the wonders of the
world.
People usually think of Lao-tzu as a hermit, a dropout from society ,
dwelling serenely in some mountain hut, unvisited except perhaps by the
occasional traveler arriving from a ’60s joke to ask, “What is the meaning
of life?” But it’ s clear from his teachings that he deeply cared about society ,
if society means the welfare of one’ s fellow human beings; his book is,
among other things, a treatise on the art of government, whether of a
country or of a child. The misperception may arise from his insistence on
wei wu wei , literally “doing not-doing,” which has been seen as passivity .
Nothing could be further from the truth.
A good athlete can enter a state of body-awareness in which the right
stroke or the right movement happens by itself, ef fortlessly , without any
interference of the conscious will. This is a paradigm for non-action: the
purest and most ef fective form of action. The game plays the game; the
poem writes the poem; we can’ t tell the dancer from the dance.Less and less do you need to force things,
until finally you arrive at non-action.
When nothing is done,
nothing is left undone.
Nothing is done because the doer has wholeheartedly vanished into the
deed; the fuel has been completely transformed into flame. This “nothing”
is, in fact, everything. It happens when we trust the intelligence of the
universe in the same way that an athlete or a dancer trusts the superior
intelligence of the body . Hence Lao-tzu’ s emphasis on softness. Softness
means the opposite of rigidity , and is synonymous with suppleness,
adaptability , endurance. Anyone who has seen a t’ai chi or aikido master
doing not-doing will know how powerful this softness is.
Lao-tzu’ s central figure is a man or woman whose life is in perfect
harmony with the way things are. This is not an idea; it is a reality; I have
seen it. The Master has mastered Nature; not in the sense of conquering it,
but of becoming it. In surrendering to the T ao, in giving up all concepts,
judgments, and desires, her mind has grown naturally compassionate. She
finds deep in her own experience the central truths of the art of living,
which are paradoxical only on the surface: that the more truly solitary we
are, the more compassionate we can be; the more we let go of what we love,
the more present our love becomes; the clearer our insight into what is
beyond good and evil, the more we can embody the good. Until finally she
is able to say , in all humility , “I am the T ao, the T ruth, the Life.”
The teaching of the T ao Te Ching is moral in the deepest sense.
Unencumbered by any concept of sin, the Master doesn’ t see evil as a force
to resist, but simply as an opaqueness, a state of self-absorption which is in
disharmony with the universal process, so that, as with a dirty window , the
light can’ t shine through. This freedom from moral categories allows him
his great compassion for the wicked and the selfish.
Thus the Master is available to all peopleand doesn’ t reject anyone.
He is ready to use all situations
and doesn’ t waste anything.
This is called embodying the light.
What is a good man but a bad man’ s teacher?
What is a bad man but a good man’ s job?
If you don’ t understand this, you will get lost,
however intelligent you are.
It is the great secret.
The reader will notice that in the many passages where Lao-tzu describes
the Master , I have used the pronoun “she” at least as often as “he.” The
Chinese language doesn’ t make this kind of distinction; in English we have
to choose. But since we are all, potentially , the Master (since the Master is,
essentially , us), I felt it would be untrue to present a male archetype, as
other versions have, ironically , done. Ironically , because of all the great
world religions the teaching of Lao-tzu is by far the most female. Of course,
you should feel free, throughout the book, to substitute “he” for “she” or
vice versa.
As to method: I worked from Paul Carus’ s literal version, which
provides English equivalents (often very quaint ones) alongside each of the
Chinese ideograms. I also consulted dozens of translations into English,
German, and French. But the most essential preparation for my work was a
fourteen-year -long course of Zen training, which brought me face to face
with Lao-tzu and his true disciples and heirs, the early Chinese Zen
Masters.With great poetry , the freest translation is sometimes the most faithful.
“We must try its ef fect as an English poem,” Dr . Johnson said; “that is the
way to judge of the merit of a translation.” I have often been fairly literal—
or as literal as one can be with such a subtle, kaleidoscopic book as the T ao
Te Ching. But I have also paraphrased, expanded, contracted, interpreted,
worked with the text, played with it, until it became embodied in a language
that felt genuine to me. If I haven’ t always translated Lao-tzu’ s words, my
intention has always been to translate his mind.Tao Te Ching1
The tao that can be told
is not the eternal T ao.
The name that can be named
is not the eternal Name.
The unnamable is the eternally real.
Naming is the origin
of all particular things.
Free from desire, you realize the mystery .
Caught in desire, you see only the manifestations.
Yet mystery and manifestations
arise from the same source.
This source is called darkness.
Darkness within darkness.
The gateway to all understanding.2
When people see some things as beautiful,
other things become ugly .
When people see some things as good,
other things become bad.
Being and non-being create each other .
Difficult and easy support each other .
Long and short define each other .
High and low depend on each other .
Before and after follow each other .
Therefore the Master
acts without doing anything
and teaches without saying anything.
Things arise and she lets them come;
things disappear and she lets them go.
She has but doesn’ t possess,
acts but doesn’ t expect.
When her work is done, she for gets it.That is why it lasts forever .3
If you overesteem great men,
people become powerless.
If you overvalue possessions,
people begin to steal.
The Master leads
by emptying people’ s minds and
filling their cores, by weakening their ambition
and toughening their resolve.
He helps people lose everything
they know , everything they desire,
and creates confusion
in those who think that they know .
Practice not-doing,
and everything will fall into place.4
The T ao is like a well:
used but never used up.
It is like the eternal void:
filled with infinite possibilities.
It is hidden but always present.
I don’ t know who gave birth to it.
It is older than God.5
The T ao doesn’ t take sides;
it gives birth to both good and evil.
The Master doesn’ t take sides;
she welcomes both saints and sinners.
The T ao is like a bellows:
it is empty yet infinitely capable.
The more you use it, the more it produces;
the more you talk of it, the less you understand.
Hold on to the center .6
The T ao is called the Great Mother:
empty yet inexhaustible,
it gives birth to infinite worlds.
It is always present within you.
You can use it any way you want.7
The T ao is infinite, eternal.
Why is it eternal?
It was never born;
thus it can never die.
Why is it infinite?
It has no desires for itself;
thus it is present for all beings.
The Master stays behind;
that is why she is ahead.
She is detached from all things;
that is why she is one with them.
Because she has let go of herself,
she is perfectly fulfilled.8
The supreme good is like water ,
which nourishes all things without trying to.
It is content with the low places that people disdain.
Thus it is like the T ao.
In dwelling, live close to the ground.
In thinking, keep to the simple.
In conflict, be fair and generous.
In governing, don’ t try to control.
In work, do what you enjoy .
In family life, be completely present.
When you are content to be simply yourself
and don’ t compare or compete,
everybody will respect you.9
Fill your bowl to the brim
and it will spill.
Keep sharpening your knife
and it will blunt.
Chase after money and security
and your heart will never unclench.
Care about people’ s approval
and you will be their prisoner .
Do your work, then step back.
The only path to serenity .1 0
Can you coax your mind from its wandering
and keep to the original oneness?
Can you let your body become
supple as a newborn child’ s?
Can you cleanse your inner vision
until you see nothing but the light?
Can you love people and lead them
without imposing your will?
Can you deal with the most vital matters
by letting events take their course?
Can you step back from your own mind
and thus understand all things?
Giving birth and nourishing,
having without possessing,
acting with no expectations,
leading and not trying to control:
this is the supreme virtue.1 1
We join spokes together in a wheel,
but it is the center hole
that makes the wagon move.
We shape clay into a pot,
but it is the emptiness inside
that holds whatever we want.
We hammer wood for a house,
but it is the inner space
that makes it livable.
We work with being,
but non-being is what we use.1 2
Colors blind the eye.
Sounds deafen the ear .
Flavors numb the taste.
Thoughts weaken the mind.
Desires wither the heart.
The Master observes the world
but trusts his inner vision.
He allows things to come and go.
His heart is open as the sky .1 3
Success is as dangerous as failure.
Hope is as hollow as fear .
What does it mean that success is as dangerous as failure?
Whether you go up the ladder or down it,
your position is shaky .
When you stand with your two feet on the ground,
you will always keep your balance.
What does it mean that hope is as hollow as fear?
Hope and fear are both phantoms
that arise from thinking of the self.
When we don’ t see the self as self,
what do we have to fear?
See the world as your self.
Have faith in the way things are.
Love the world as your self;
then you can care for all things.1 4
Look, and it can’ t be seen.
Listen, and it can’ t be heard.
Reach, and it can’ t be grasped.
Above, it isn’ t bright.
Below , it isn’ t dark.
Seamless, unnamable,
it returns to the realm of nothing.
Form that includes all forms,
image without an image,
subtle, beyond all conception.
Approach it and there is no beginning;
follow it and there is no end.
You can’ t know it, but you can be it,
at ease in your own life.
Just realize where you come from:
this is the essence of wisdom.1 5
The ancient Masters were profound and subtle.
Their wisdom was unfathomable.
There is no way to describe it;
all we can describe is their appearance.
They were careful
as someone crossing an iced-over stream.
Alert as a warrior in enemy territory .
Courteous as a guest.
Fluid as melting ice.
Shapable as a block of wood.
Receptive as a valley .
Clear as a glass of water .
Do you have the patience to wait
till your mud settles and the water is clear?
Can you remain unmoving
till the right action arises by itself?
The Master doesn’ t seek fulfillment.Not seeking, not expecting,
she is present, and can welcome all things.1 6
Empty your mind of all thoughts.
Let your heart be at peace.
Watch the turmoil of beings,
but contemplate their return.
Each separate being in the universe
returns to the common source.
Returning to the source is serenity .
If you don’ t realize the source,
you stumble in confusion and sorrow .
When you realize where you come from,
you naturally become tolerant,
disinterested, amused,
kindhearted as a grandmother ,
dignified as a king.
Immersed in the wonder of the T ao,
you can deal with whatever life brings you,
and when death comes, you are ready .1 7
When the Master governs, the people
are hardly aware that he exists.
Next best is a leader who is loved.
Next, one who is feared.
The worst is one who is despised.
If you don’ t trust the people,
you make them untrustworthy .
The Master doesn’ t talk, he acts.
When his work is done,
the people say , “Amazing:
we did it, all by ourselves!”1 8
When the great T ao is for gotten,
goodness and piety appear .
When the body’ s intelligence declines,
cleverness and knowledge step forth.
When there is no peace in the family ,
filial piety begins.
When the country falls into chaos,
patriotism is born.1 9
Throw away holiness and wisdom,
and people will be a hundred times happier .
Throw away morality and justice,
and people will do the right thing.
Throw away industry and profit,
and there won’ t be any thieves.
If these three aren’ t enough,
just stay at the center of the circle
and let all things take their course.2 0
Stop thinking, and end your problems.
What dif ference between yes and no?
What dif ference between success and failure?
Must you value what others value,
avoid what others avoid?
How ridiculous!
Other people are excited,
as though they were at a parade.
I alone don’ t care,
I alone am expressionless,
like an infant before it can smile.
Other people have what they need;
I alone possess nothing.
I alone drift about,
like someone without a home.
I am like an idiot, my mind is so empty .
Other people are bright;I alone am dark.
Other people are sharp;
I alone am dull.
Other people have a purpose;
I alone don’ t know .
I drift like a wave on the ocean,
I blow as aimless as the wind.
I am dif ferent from ordinary people.
I drink from the Great Mother ’s breasts.2 1
The Master keeps her mind
always at one with the T ao;
that is what gives her her radiance.
The T ao is ungraspable.
How can her mind be at one with it?
Because she doesn’ t cling to ideas.
The T ao is dark and unfathomable.
How can it make her radiant?
Because she lets it.
Since before time and space were,
the T ao is.
It is beyond is and is not .
How do I know this is true?
I look inside myself and see.2 2
If you want to become whole,
let yourself be partial.
If you want to become straight,
let yourself be crooked.
If you want to become full,
let yourself be empty .
If you want to be reborn,
let yourself die.
If you want to be given everything,
give everything up.
The Master , by residing in the T ao,
sets an example for all beings.
Because he doesn’ t display himself,
people can see his light.
Because he has nothing to prove,
people can trust his words.
Because he doesn’ t know who he is,people recognize themselves in him.
Because he has no goal in mind,
everything he does succeeds.
When the ancient Masters said,
“If you want to be given everything,
give everything up,”
they weren’ t using empty phrases.
Only in being lived by the T ao
can you be truly yourself.2 3
Express yourself completely ,
then keep quiet.
Be like the forces of nature:
when it blows, there is only wind;
when it rains, there is only rain;
when the clouds pass, the sun shines through.
If you open yourself to the T ao,
you are at one with the T ao
and you can embody it completely .
If you open yourself to insight,
you are at one with insight
and you can use it completely .
If you open yourself to loss,
you are at one with loss
and you can accept it completely .
Open yourself to the T ao,
then trust your natural responses;and everything will fall into place.2 4
He who stands on tiptoe
doesn’ t stand firm.
He who rushes ahead
doesn’ t go far .
He who tries to shine
dims his own light.
He who defines himself
can’t know who he really is.
He who has power over others
can’t empower himself.
He who clings to his work
will create nothing that endures.
If you want to accord with the T ao,
just do your job, then let go.2 5
There was something formless and perfect
before the universe was born.
It is serene. Empty .
Solitary . Unchanging.
Infinite. Eternally present.
It is the mother of the universe.
For lack of a better name,
I call it the T ao.
It flows through all things,
inside and outside, and returns
to the origin of all things.
The T ao is great.
The universe is great.
Earth is great.
Man is great.
These are the four great powers.
Man follows the earth.Earth follows the universe.
The universe follows the T ao.
The T ao follows only itself.2 6
The heavy is the root of the light.
The unmoved is the source of all movement.
Thus the Master travels all day
without leaving home.
However splendid the views,
she stays serenely in herself.
Why should the lord of the country
flit about like a fool?
If you let yourself be blown to and fro,
you lose touch with your root.
If you let restlessness move you,
you lose touch with who you are.2 7
A good traveler has no fixed plans
and is not intent upon arriving.
A good artist lets his intuition
lead him wherever it wants.
A good scientist has freed himself of concepts
and keeps his mind open to what is.
Thus the Master is available to all people
and doesn’ t reject anyone.
He is ready to use all situations
and doesn’ t waste anything.
This is called embodying the light.
What is a good man but a bad man’ s teacher?
What is a bad man but a good man’ s job?
If you don’ t understand this, you will get lost,
however intelligent you are.
It is the great secret.2 8
Know the male,
yet keep to the female:
receive the world in your arms.
If you receive the world,
the T ao will never leave
you and you will be like a little child.
Know the white,
yet keep to the black:
be a pattern for the world.
If you are a pattern for the world,
the T ao will be strong inside you
and there will be nothing you can’ t do.
Know the personal,
yet keep to the impersonal:
accept the world as it is.
If you accept the world,
the T ao will be luminous inside youand you will return to your primal self.
The world is formed from the void,
like utensils from a block of wood.
The Master knows the utensils,
yet keeps to the block:
thus she can use all things.2 9
Do you want to improve the world?
I don’ t think it can be done.
The world is sacred.
It can’ t be improved.
If you tamper with it, you’ll ruin it.
If you treat it like an object, you’ll lose it.
There is a time for being ahead,
a time for being behind;
a time for being in motion,
a time for being at rest;
a time for being vigorous,
a time for being exhausted;
a time for being safe,
a time for being in danger .
The Master sees things as they are,
without trying to control them.
She lets them go their own way ,and resides at the center of the circle.3 0
Whoever relies on the T ao in governing men
doesn’ t try to force issues
or defeat enemies by force of arms.
For every force there is a counterforce.
Violence, even well intentioned,
always rebounds upon oneself.
The Master does his job
and then stops.
He understands that the universe
is forever out of control,
and that trying to dominate events
goes against the current of the T ao.
Because he believes in himself,
he doesn’ t try to convince others.
Because he is content with himself,
he doesn’ t need others’ approval.
Because he accepts himself,the whole world accepts him.3 1
Weapons are the tools of violence;
all decent men detest them.
Weapons are the tools of fear;
a decent man will avoid them
except in the direst necessity
and, if compelled, will use them
only with the utmost restraint.
Peace is his highest value.
If the peace has been shattered,
how can he be content?
His enemies are not demons,
but human beings like himself.
He doesn’ t wish them personal harm.
Nor does he rejoice in victory .
How could he rejoice in victory
and delight in the slaughter of men?
He enters a battle gravely ,with sorrow and with great compassion,
as if he were attending a funeral.3 2
The T ao can’ t be perceived,
Smaller than an electron,
it contains uncountable galaxies.
If powerful men and women
could remain centered in the T ao,
all things would be in harmony .
The world would become a paradise.
All people would be at peace,
and the law would be written in their hearts.
When you have names and forms,
know that they are provisional.
When you have institutions,
know where their functions should end.
Knowing when to stop,
you can avoid any danger .
All things end in the
Tao as rivers flow into the sea.3 3
Knowing others is intelligence;
knowing yourself is true wisdom.
Mastering others is strength;
mastering yourself is true power .
If you realize that you have enough,
you are truly rich.
If you stay in the center
and embrace death with your whole heart,
you will endure forever .3 4
The great T ao flows everywhere.
All things are born from it,
yet it doesn’ t create them.
It pours itself into its work,
yet it makes no claim.
It nourishes infinite worlds,
yet it doesn’ t hold on to them.
Since it is mer ged with all things
and hidden in their hearts,
it can be called humble.
Since all things vanish into it
and it alone endures,
it can be called great.
It isn’ t aware of its greatness;
thus it is truly great.3 5
She who is centered in the T ao
can go where she wishes, without danger .
She perceives the universal harmony ,
even amid great pain,
because she has found peace in her heart.
Music or the smell of good cooking
may make people stop and enjoy .
But words that point to the T ao
seem monotonous and without flavor .
When you look for it, there is nothing to see.
When you listen for it, there is nothing to hear .
When you use it, it is inexhaustible.3 6
If you want to shrink something,
you must first allow it to expand.
If you want to get rid of something,
you must first allow it to flourish.
If you want to take something,
you must first allow it to be given.
This is called the subtle perception
of the way things are.
The soft overcomes the hard.
The slow overcomes the fast.
Let your workings remain a mystery .
Just show people the results.3 7
The T ao never does anything,
yet through it all things are done.
If powerful men and women
could center themselves in it,
the whole world would be transformed
by itself, in its natural rhythms.
People would be content
with their simple, everyday lives,
in harmony , and free of desire.
When there is no desire,
all things are at peace.3 8
The Master doesn’ t try to be powerful;
thus he is truly powerful.
The ordinary man keeps reaching for power;
thus he never has enough.
The Master does nothing,
yet he leaves nothing undone.
The ordinary man is always doing things,
yet many more are left to be done.
The kind man does something,
yet something remains undone.
The just man does something,
and leaves many things to be done.
The moral man does something,
and when no one responds
he rolls up his sleeves and uses force.
When the T ao is lost, there is goodness.
When goodness is lost, there is morality .When morality is lost, there is ritual.
Ritual is the husk of true faith,
the beginning of chaos.
Therefore the Master concerns himself
with the depths and not the surface,
with the fruit and not the flower .
He has no will of his own.
He dwells in reality ,
and lets all illusions go.3 9
In harmony with the T ao,
the sky is clear and spacious,
the earth is solid and full,
all creatures flourish together ,
content with the way they are,
endlessly repeating themselves,
endlessly renewed.
When man interferes with the T ao,
the sky becomes filthy ,
the earth becomes depleted,
the equilibrium crumbles,
creatures become extinct.
The Master views the parts with compassion,
because he understands the whole.
His constant practice is humility .
He doesn’ t glitter like a jewel
but lets himself be shaped by the T ao,as rugged and common as a stone.4 0
Return is the movement of the T ao.
Yielding is the way of the T ao.
All things are born of being.
Being is born of non-being.4 1
When a superior man hears of the T ao,
he immediately begins to embody it.
When an average man hears of the T ao,
he half believes it, half doubts it.
When a foolish man hears of the T ao,
he laughs out loud.
If he didn’ t laugh,
it wouldn’ t be the T ao.
Thus it is said:
The path into the light seems dark,
the path forward seems to go back,
the direct path seems long,
true power seems weak,
true purity seems tarnished,
true steadfastness seems changeable,
true clarity seems obscure,
the greatest art seems unsophisticated,the greatest love seems indif ferent,
the greatest wisdom seems childish.
The T ao is nowhere to be found.
Yet it nourishes and completes all things.4 2
The T ao gives birth to One.
One gives birth to T wo.
Two gives birth to Three.
Three gives birth to all things.
All things have their backs to the female
and stand facing the male.
When male and female combine,
all things achieve harmony .
Ordinary men hate solitude.
But the Master makes use of it,
embracing his aloneness, realizing
he is one with the whole universe.4 3
The gentlest thing in the world
overcomes the hardest thing in the world.
That which has no substance
enters where there is no space.
This shows the value of non-action.
Teaching without words,
performing without actions:
that is the Master ’s way .4 4
Fame or integrity: which is more important?
Money or happiness: which is more valuable?
Success or failure: which is more destructive?
If you look to others for fulfillment,
you will never truly be fulfilled.
If your happiness depends on money ,
you will never be happy with yourself.
Be content with what you have;
rejoice in the way things are.
When you realize there is nothing lacking,
the whole world belongs to you.4 5
True perfection seems imperfect,
yet it is perfectly itself.
True fullness seems empty ,
yet it is fully present.
True straightness seems crooked.
True wisdom seems foolish.
True art seems artless.
The Master allows things to happen.
She shapes events as they come.
She steps out of the way
and lets the T ao speak for itself.4 6
When a country is in harmony with the T ao,
the factories make trucks and tractors.
When a country goes counter to the T ao,
warheads are stockpiled outside the cities.
There is no greater illusion than fear ,
no greater wrong than preparing to defend yourself,
no greater misfortune than having an enemy .
Whoever can see through all fear
will always be safe.4 7
Without opening your door ,
you can open your heart to the world.
Without looking out your window ,
you can see the essence of the T ao.
The more you know ,
the less you understand.
The Master arrives without leaving,
sees the light without looking,
achieves without doing a thing.4 8
In the pursuit of knowledge,
every day something is added.
In the practice of the T ao,
every day something is dropped.
Less and less do you need to force things,
until finally you arrive at non-action.
When nothing is done,
nothing is left undone.
True mastery can be gained
by letting things go their own way .
It can’ t be gained by interfering.4 9
The Master has no mind of her own.
She works with the mind of the people.
She is good to people who are good.
She is also good to people who aren’ t good.
This is true goodness.
She trusts people who are trustworthy .
She also trusts people who aren’ t trustworthy .
This is true trust.
The Master ’s mind is like space.
People don’ t understand her .
They look to her and wait.
She treats them like her own children.5 0
The Master gives himself up
to whatever the moment brings.
He knows that he is going to die,
and he has nothing left to hold on to:
no illusions in his mind,
no resistances in his body .
He doesn’ t think about his actions;
they flow from the core of his being.
He holds nothing back from life;
therefore he is ready for death,
as a man is ready for sleep
after a good day’ s work.5 1
Every being in the universe
is an expression of the T ao.
It springs into existence,
unconscious, perfect, free,
takes on a physical body ,
lets circumstances complete it.
That is why every being
spontaneously honors the T ao.
The T ao gives birth to all beings,
nourishes them, maintains them,
cares for them, comforts them, protects them,
takes them back to itself,
creating without possessing,
acting without expecting,
guiding without interfering.
That is why love of the T ao
is in the very nature of things.5 2
In the beginning was the T ao.
All things issue from it;
all things return to it.
To find the origin,
trace back to the manifestations.
When you recognize the children
and find the mother ,
you will be free of sorrow .
If you close your mind in judgments
and traf fic with desires,
your heart will be troubled.
If you keep your mind from judging
and aren’ t led by the senses,
your heart will find peace.
Seeing into darkness is clarity .
Knowing how to yield is strength.
Use your own lightand return to the source of light.
This is called practicing eternity .5 3
The great W ay is easy ,
yet people prefer the side paths.
Be aware when things are out of balance.
Stay centered within the T ao.
When rich speculators prosper
while farmers lose their land;
when government of ficials spend money
on weapons instead of cures;
when the upper class is extravagant and irresponsible
while the poor have nowhere to turn—
all this is robbery and chaos.
It is not in keeping with the T ao.5 4
Whoever is planted in the
Tao will not be rooted up.
Whoever embraces the
Tao will not slip away .
Her name will be held in honor
from generation to generation.
Let the T ao be present in your life
and you will become genuine.
Let it be present in your family
and your family will flourish.
Let it be present in your country
and your country will be an example
to all countries in the world.
Let it be present in the universe
and the universe will sing.
How do I know this is true?
By looking inside myself.5 5
He who is in harmony with the T ao
is like a newborn child.
Its bones are soft, its muscles are weak,
but its grip is powerful.
It doesn’ t know about the union
of male and female,
yet its penis can stand erect,
so intense is its vital power .
It can scream its head of f all day ,
yet it never becomes hoarse,
so complete is its harmony .
The Master ’s power is like this.
He lets all things come and go
effortlessly , without desire.
He never expects results;
thus he is never disappointed.
He is never disappointed;thus his spirit never grows old.5 6
Those who know don’ t talk.
Those who talk don’ t know .
Close your mouth,
block of f your senses,
blunt your sharpness,
untie your knots,
soften your glare,
settle your dust.
This is the primal identity .
Be like the T ao.
It can’ t be approached or withdrawn from,
benefited or harmed,
honored or brought into disgrace.
It gives itself up continually .
That is why it endures.5 7
If you want to be a great leader ,
you must learn to follow the T ao.
Stop trying to control.
Let go of fixed plans and concepts,
and the world will govern itself.
The more prohibitions you have,
the less virtuous people will be.
The more weapons you have,
the less secure people will be.
The more subsidies you have,
the less self-reliant people will be.
Therefore the Master says:
I let go of the law ,
and people become honest.
I let go of economics,
and people become prosperous.
I let go of religion,and people become serene.
I let go of all desire for the common good,
and the good becomes common as grass.5 8
If a country is governed with tolerance,
the people are comfortable and honest.
If a country is governed with repression,
the people are depressed and crafty .
When the will to power is in char ge,
the higher the ideals, the lower the results.
Try to make people happy ,
and you lay the groundwork for misery .
Try to make people moral,
and you lay the groundwork for vice.
Thus the Master is content
to serve as an example
and not to impose her will.
She is pointed, but doesn’ t pierce.
Straightforward, but supple.
Radiant, but easy on the eyes.5 9
For governing a country well
there is nothing better than moderation.
The mark of a moderate man
is freedom from his own ideas.
Tolerant like the sky ,
all-pervading like sunlight,
firm like a mountain,
supple like a tree in the wind,
he has no destination in view
and makes use of anything
life happens to bring his way .
Nothing is impossible for him.
Because he has let go,
he can care for the people’ s welfare
as a mother cares for her child.6 0
Governing a lar ge country
is like frying a small fish.
You spoil it with too much poking.
Center your country in the T ao
and evil will have no power .
Not that it isn’ t there,
but you’ll be able to step out of its way .
Give evil nothing to oppose
and it will disappear by itself.6 1
When a country obtains great power ,
it becomes like the sea:
all streams run downward into it.
The more powerful it grows,
the greater the need for humility .
Humility means trusting the T ao,
thus never needing to be defensive.
A great nation is like a great man:
When he makes a mistake, he realizes it.
Having realized it, he admits it.
Having admitted it, he corrects it.
He considers those who point out his faults
as his most benevolent teachers.
He thinks of his enemy
as the shadow that he himself casts.
If a nation is centered in the T ao,
if it nourishes its own peopleand doesn’ t meddle in the af fairs of others,
it will be a light to all nations in the world.6 2
The T ao is the center of the universe,
the good man’ s treasure,
the bad man’ s refuge.
Honors can be bought with fine words,
respect can be won with good deeds;
but the T ao is beyond all value,
and no one can achieve it.
Thus, when a new leader is chosen,
don’t offer to help him
with your wealth or your expertise.
Offer instead
to teach him about the T ao.
Why did the ancient Masters esteem the T ao?
Because, being one with the T ao,
when you seek, you find;
and when you make a mistake, you are for given.
That is why everybody loves it.6 3
Act without doing;
work without ef fort.
Think of the small as lar ge
and the few as many .
Confront the dif ficult
while it is still easy;
accomplish the great task
by a series of small acts.
The Master never reaches for the great;
thus she achieves greatness.
When she runs into a dif ficulty ,
she stops and gives herself to it.
She doesn’ t cling to her own comfort;
thus problems are no problem for her .6 4
What is rooted is easy to nourish.
What is recent is easy to correct.
What is brittle is easy to break.
What is small is easy to scatter .
Prevent trouble before it arises.
Put things in order before they exist.
The giant pine tree
grows from a tiny sprout.
The journey of a thousand miles
starts from beneath your feet.
Rushing into action, you fail.
Trying to grasp things, you lose them.
Forcing a project to completion,
you ruin what was almost ripe.
Therefore the Master takes action
by letting things take their course.
He remains as calmat the end as at the beginning.
He has nothing,
thus has nothing to lose.
What he desires is non-desire;
what he learns is to unlearn.
He simply reminds people
of who they have always been.
He cares about nothing but the T ao.
Thus he can care for all things.6 5
The ancient Masters
didn’ t try to educate the people,
but kindly taught them to not-know .
When they think that they know the answers,
people are dif ficult to guide.
When they know that they don’ t know ,
people can find their own way .
If you want to learn how to govern,
avoid being clever or rich.
The simplest pattern is the clearest.
Content with an ordinary life,
you can show all people the way
back to their own true nature.6 6
All streams flow to the sea
because it is lower than they are.
Humility gives it its power .
If you want to govern the people,
you must place yourself below them.
If you want to lead the people,
you must learn how to follow them.
The Master is above the people,
and no one feels oppressed.
She goes ahead of the people,
and no one feels manipulated.
The whole world is grateful to her .
Because she competes with no one,
no one can compete with her .6 7
Some say that my teaching is nonsense.
Others call it lofty but impractical.
But to those who have looked inside themselves,
this nonsense makes perfect sense.
And to those who put it into practice,
this loftiness has roots that go deep.
I have just three things to teach:
simplicity , patience, compassion.
These three are your greatest treasures.
Simple in actions and in thoughts,
you return to the source of being.
Patient with both friends and enemies,
you accord with the way things are.
Compassionate toward yourself,
you reconcile all beings in the world.6 8
The best athlete
wants his opponent at his best.
The best general
enters the mind of his enemy .
The best businessman
serves the communal good.
The best leader
follows the will of the people.
All of them embody
the virtue of non-competition.
Not that they don’ t love to compete,
but they do it in the spirit of play .
In this they are like children
and in harmony with the T ao.6 9
The generals have a saying:
“Rather than make the first move
it is better to wait and see.
Rather than advance an inch
it is better to retreat a yard.”
This is called
going forward without advancing,
pushing back without using weapons.
There is no greater misfortune
than underestimating your enemy .
Underestimating your enemy
means thinking that he is evil.
Thus you destroy your three treasures
and become an enemy yourself.
When two great forces oppose each other ,
the victory will go
to the one that knows how to yield.7 0
My teachings are easy to understand
and easy to put into practice.
Yet your intellect will never grasp them,
and if you try to practice them, you’ll fail.
My teachings are older than the world.
How can you grasp their meaning?
If you want to know me,
look inside your heart.7 1
Not-knowing is true knowledge.
Presuming to know is a disease.
First realize that you are sick;
then you can move toward health.
The Master is her own physician.
She has healed herself of all knowing.
Thus she is truly whole.7 2
When they lose their sense of awe,
people turn to religion.
When they no longer trust themselves,
they begin to depend upon authority .
Therefore the Master steps back
so that people won’ s be confused.
He teaches without a teaching,
so that people will have nothing to learn.7 3
The T ao is always at ease.
It overcomes without competing,
answers without speaking a word,
arrives without being summoned,
accomplishes without a plan.
Its net covers the whole universe.
And though its meshes are wide,
it doesn’ t let a thing slip through.7 4
If you realize that all things change,
there is nothing you will try to hold on to.
If you aren’ t afraid of dying,
there is nothing you can’ t achieve.
Trying to control the future
is like trying to take the master carpenter ’s place.
When you handle the master carpenter ’s tools,
chances are that you’ll cut yourself.7 5
When taxes are too high,
people go hungry .
When the government is too intrusive,
people lose their spirit.
Act for the people’ s benefit.
Trust them; leave them alone.7 6
Men are born soft and supple;
dead, they are stif f and hard.
Plants are born tender and pliant;
dead, they are brittle and dry .
Thus whoever is stif f and inflexible
is a disciple of death.
Whoever is soft and yielding
is a disciple of life.
The hard and stif f will be broken.
The soft and supple will prevail.7 7
As it acts in the world, the T ao
is like the bending of a bow .
The top is bent downward;
the bottom is bent up.
It adjusts excess and deficiency
so that there is perfect balance.
It takes from what is too much
and gives to what isn’ t enough.
Those who try to control,
who use force to protect their power ,
go against the direction of the T ao.
They take from those who don’ t have enough
and give to those who have far too much.
The Master can keep giving
because there is no end to her wealth.
She acts without expectation,
succeeds without taking credit,and doesn’ t think that she is better
than anyone else.7 8
Nothing in the world
is as soft and yielding as water .
Yet for dissolving the hard and inflexible,
nothing can surpass it.
The soft overcomes the hard;
the gentle overcomes the rigid.
Everyone knows this is true,
but few can put it into practice.
Therefore the Master remains
serene in the midst of sorrow .
Evil cannot enter his heart.
Because he has given up helping,
he is people’ s greatest help.
True words seem paradoxical.7 9
Failure is an opportunity .
If you blame someone else,
there is no end to the blame.
Therefore the Master
fulfills her own obligations
and corrects her own mistakes.
She does what she needs to do
and demands nothing of others.8 0
If a country is governed wisely ,
its inhabitants will be content.
They enjoy the labor of their hands
and don’ t waste time inventing
labor -saving machines.
Since they dearly love their homes,
they aren’ t interested in travel.
There may be a few wagons and boats,
but these don’ t go anywhere.
There may be an arsenal of weapons,
but nobody ever uses them.
People enjoy their food,
take pleasure in being with their families,
spend weekends working in their gardens,
delight in the doings of the neighborhood.
And even though the next country is so close
that people can hear its roosters crowing andits dogs barking, they are content to die of old age
without ever having gone to see it.8 1
True words aren’ t eloquent;
eloquent words aren’ t true.
Wise men don’ t need to prove their point;
men who need to prove their point aren’ t wise.
The Master has no possessions.
The more he does for others,
the happier he is.
The more he gives to others,
the wealthier he is.
The T ao nourishes by not forcing.
By not dominating, the Master leads.N o t e s
CHAPTER 1
Describing the indescribable, teaching the unteachable, pointing the way to
the W ay—what does Lao-tzu think he is doing here? It can’ t be done. No
way.
Hence Po Chü-i, poet and stand-up comedian, wrote,
“He who talks doesn’ t know ,
he who knows doesn’ t talk”:
that is what Lao-tzu told us,
in a book of five thousand words.
If he was the one who knew ,
how could he have been such a blabbermouth?
That’ s the problem with spiritual teachers. They have  to be blabbermouths.
But their words are (in the traditional Buddhist metaphor) fingers pointing
at the moon; if you watch the finger , you can’ t see the moon. How
meticulous the great Masters had to be!
A monk asked Ma-tsu, “Why do you teach, ‘Mind is Buddha’?”
Ma-tsu said, “T o stop a baby from crying.”The monk said, “When the crying has stopped, what then?”
Ma-tsu said, “Then I teach, ‘Not mind, not Buddha.’”
The monk said, “How about someone who isn’ t attached to either?”
Ma-tsu said, “I would tell him, ‘Not beings.’”
The monk said, “And what if you met a man unattached to all things: what
would you tell him?”
Ma-tsu said, “I would just let him experience the great T ao.”
In fact, the truth is right before our eyes; right under our noses; so simple
that every child understands it; and yet, as Bankei said, the farther you enter
into it, the deeper it is. Where is the way to the W ay? What a question!
Still, for complicated minds, drastic measures are needed. Lao-tzu’ s
book was written as a response, out of grandmotherly kindness. According
to the oldest biography ,
Lao-tzu lived for a long time in the country of Chou, but seeing its
decline he departed. When he reached the frontier , the guard said,
“Since you are going away , Sir, could you write a book to teach me
the art of living?” Thereupon Lao-tzu wrote his book about the T ao,
and departed.
This is legend, but it is an accurate description of the way in which true
teaching happens. He who knows doesn’ t talk, but words are no hindrance
for him. He uses them as he would use gardening tools. When someone
asks, he answers.
The tao that can be told / is not the eternal T ao: The text reads, “The tao
that can be tao-ed [one meaning of tao being ‘to express’] / is not the
eternal T ao.” Other possible renderings: “The way that can be weighed / isnot the eternal W ay,” “The force that can be forced / is not the eternal
Force.”
you r ealize the mystery : Infinitely marvelous, yet as ordinary as
sunlight. Impossible to know , yet as easy as touching your nose when you
wash your face.
This sour ce is called darkness : Because none of our senses can perceive
it. It is also called “light,” because the less we obstruct it, the more radiant
we are.
The gateway to all understanding : In order to understand, we have to
remain in the darkness of not-knowing.
CHAPTER 2
acts without doing anything : Her actions are appropriate responses. Thus
they are ef fortless. She embodies compassion, yet she doesn’ t try to be
compassionate. She doesn’ t struggle to make money , yet she enjoys
spending it when it comes to her . She goes her own way , yet she accepts
help gratefully and has no pride in walking alone. She is not elated by
praise, not discouraged by neglect. She doesn’ t give even a moment’ s
thought to right or wrong. She never has to make a decision; decisions arise
by themselves. She is like an actress who loves her role. The T ao is writing
the script.
teaches without saying anything : The way she buys oranges or ties her
shoelaces is a teaching. Her face is more eloquent than any scripture could
be.
That is why it lasts for ever: Not in time and space, but in quality .
CHAPTER 3emptying people’ s minds : He empties them of concepts, judgments, and
desires. Thus they can return to a state of childlike simplicity .
filling their cor es: He fills them with a sense of their original identity .
Thus they can return to a state of joy .
weakening their ambition : When they have no false self to nourish or
defend, they find that greed, hatred, and arrogance vanish by themselves.
toughening their r esolve : Their innermost intention. They develop
enough self-reliance to give up the idea of self.
CHAPTER 4
Following Ch’en Ku-ying, I have deleted the second stanza of the Chinese
text, which seems to be an interpolation from chapter 56.
It is older than God : There is no God when there is nothing but God.
CHAPTER 5
The T ao doesn’ t take sides; / it gives birth to both good and evil : Literally ,
“Heaven and earth are impartial; they treat all things like straw dogs,” as
the Master “treats all people like straw dogs,” Straw dogs were ritual
objects, venerated before the ceremony but afterward abandoned and
trampled underfoot. The point here is not that the T ao is cruel to things, nor
that the Master is ruthless with people, but that they are impartial. The
Master sees all beings arising from the same source, working out their
karma (usually with great suf fering), and returning to the source. And since
people are in constant flux, she understands that at any moment they are
capable of the most astonishing spiritual transformations. Why should she
pin them motionless with a judgment of “good” or “bad”?
CHAPTER 6First stanza: Literally , “The spirit of the valley never dies. It is called the
mysterious female. The gate of the mysterious female is the root of heaven
and earth.” Chu Hsi said, “The female is one who receives something and,
with it, creates. This creative principle is the most marvelous thing in the
universe.”
CHAPTER 7
The T ao is infinite, eternal : Here is everywhere. Anytime is now .
The Master stays behind; that is why she is ahead : She is like a turtle:
wherever she is, is home. Actually , she is neither behind nor ahead, but
exactly even with all things.
She is detached : Bunan said, “It is easy to keep things at a distance; it is
hard to be naturally beyond them.” Detachment results in clarity; clarity
expresses itself in love. Her heart is like a mirror , which reflects all faces,
without judgment, exactly as they are.
CHAPTER 8
The supr eme good is like water : I asked my friend and teacher Emilie
Conrad-Da’oud, founder of Continuum, to comment on this verse. She said,
Water is the source of all life, life’ s matrix and fecundity; it
overflows into everything, it moves everywhere. W e are
fundamentally water: muscled water . And the idea that we ever
leave the amniotic fluid is a misconception. The amniotic fluid is
the state of total nourishment and unconditional love. It is always
present for us and contains everything we could possibly want. In
fact, we are that fluid of love.
CHAPTER 9Do your work, then step back : When you do your work whole-heartedly ,
you are glad to let it go, just as a parent lets a child go, into its own life.
CHAPTER 10
Can you let your body become : Literally , “Can you concentrate your chi
[vital ener gy] until it becomes…”
supple as a newborn child’ s: Emilie Conrad-Da’oud’ s comment:
There is no self-consciousness in the newborn child. Later on, the
mind wanders into self-images, starts to think Should I do this? Is
this movement right ? and loses the immediacy of the moment. As
self-consciousness develops, the muscles become less supple, less
like the world. But the young child is pure fluidity . It isn’ t aware of
any separation, so all its movements are spontaneous and alive and
whole and perfect.
If an adult body becomes truly supple, though, there’ s a quality
to its movement that the child’ s doesn’ t have, a texture of
experience, a fourth dimension of time. When we watch a seventy-
year-old hand move, we feel, “Y es, that hand has lived.” All the
bodies it has touched, all the weights it has lifted, all the heads it has
cradled are present in its movement. It is resonant with experience;
the fingers curve with a sense of having been there. Whereas in a
child’ s hand there’ s a sense of just arriving. The child’ s movement is
pristine and innocent and delightful, but a truly supple adult
movement is awesome, because all life is included in it.
until you see nothing but the light : That is, until your heart is at peace.
The great modern Indian sage Ramana Maharshi said,
There is no greater mystery than this, that we keep seeking reality
though in fact we are reality . We think that there is something
hiding our reality and that this must be destroyed before reality isgained. How ridiculous! A day will dawn when you will laugh at all
your past ef forts. That which will be on the day you laugh is also
here and now .
Can you love people and lead them / without imposing your will : Emilie
Conrad-Da’oud’ s comment:
The more supple your body is, the less dictatorial you’ll be. The
military stance is the most invasive stance that you can possibly
take. Its opposite—the boneless, wishy-washy posture of someone
who doesn’ t stand for anything—is just as unhealthy . Suppleness is
really fluidity . It transcends strength and weakness. When your body
is supple, it feels like there’ s no barrier in you, you can flow in any
direction, your movement is a complete expression of yourself.
by letting events take their course : Literally , “by becoming the female.”
The Ho-shang Kung commentary says, “In arranging one’ s life properly ,
one should be as calm and flexible as a woman.”
CHAPTER 1 1
non-being is what we use : The true teacher realizes that there is nothing to
teach; that’ s why he can teach anyone who wants to learn. The true lover
realizes that there is no one to love; that’ s why he is available to anyone
who needs him. The Master realizes that there is nowhere to stand; that’ s
why he can stand anywhere.
CHAPTER 12
Colors blind the eye, etc. : We need space in order to see, silence in order to
hear, sleep in order to carry on with our wakefulness. If the senses are too
cluttered with objects, they lose their acuteness and will eventually decay .Desir es wither the heart : Once it has let go of desires, the heart
naturally overflows with love, like David’ s cup in Psalm 23.
his inner vision : There is no inside or outside for him. He reflects
whatever appears, without judgment, whether it is a flower or a heap of
garbage, a criminal or a saint. Whatever happens is all right. He treats his
own anger or grief just as he would treat an angry or grieving child: with
compassion.
open as the sky : The sky holds sun, moon, stars, clouds, rain, snow , or
pure azure. Because it doesn’ t care which of these appear , it has room for
them all.
CHAPTER 13
keep your balance : The trick is to go up or down the ladder with your feet
on the ground. Bravo! Bravissimo!!
See the world as your self : The outer mirrors the inner .
CHAPTER 14
Look, and it can’ t be seen : Another way of saying this: “Look, and it’ s right
before your eyes.”
CHAPTER 15
till your mud settles : “Mud” stands for concepts, judgments, desires,
expectations—everything that obscures and narrows reality . The Master ’s
life is pure and placid: predictable like the seasons, obvious like the moon.
When our mind/heart becomes transparent, the light of the T ao shines
through.the water is clear : I asked my old teacher , Zen Master Seung Sahn, to
comment on this verse. He said,
Our mind is like a glass of clear water . If we put salt into the water ,
it becomes salt water; sugar , it becomes sugar water; shit, it
becomes shit water . But originally the water is clear . No thinking,
no mind. No mind, no problem.
CHAPTER 16
Empty your mind : This doesn’ t mean “suppress your thoughts,” but “step
back from them.” Insight into the T ao has nothing to do with the intellect
and its abstractions. When we step out of self-consciousness, we step into
the T ao. Lin Ching-hsi said,
The mind is originally empty , and only when it remains empty ,
without grasping or rejecting, can it respond to natural things,
without prejudice. It should be like a river gor ge with a swan flying
overhead; the river has no desire to retain the swan, yet the swan’ s
passage is traced by its shadow , without any omission. Another
example: A mirror will reflect all things perfectly , whether they are
beautiful or ugly; it never refuses to show a thing, nor does it retain
the thing after it is gone. The mind should be as open as this.
Does this sound anti-intellectual? But listen to Einstein:
The scientist’ s religious feeling takes the form of a rapturous
amazement at the harmony of natural law , which reveals an
intelligence of such superiority that, in comparison with it, all the
systematic thinking of human beings is an utterly insignificant
reflection. This feeling is the guiding principle of his life and work.
CHAPTER 17One of several chapters that are as relevant to child-rearing as to
government.
The Master doesn’ t talk, he acts : His words are in perfect harmony with
his actions. He is always genuine.
CHAPTER 18
the gr eat T ao: Jayata said to V asubandu, “If you have nothing to ask for in
your mind, that state of mind is called the T ao.”
goodness and piety appear : When the T ao is for gotten, people act
according to rules, not from the heart. This goodness is as insecure as Job’ s
and can be as self-satisfied as Little Jack Horner ’s. Whereas a good father
has no intention of being good; he just acts naturally .
CHAPTER 19
Throw away holiness and wisdom : When some folks are called saints, other
folks think of themselves as sinners. When one fellow is called wise, others
imagine that there is something they need to know . The Master doesn’ t have
these categories; for her , no one is wise or holy; thus, in her presence
everyone feels at home.
CHAPTER 20
yes and no :
Chao-chou asked Nan-ch’üan, “What is the T ao?”
Nan-ch’üan said, “Everyday mind is the T ao.”
Chao-chou said, “How can I approach it?”Nan-ch’üan said, “The more you try to approach it, the farther away you’ll
be.”
“But if I don’ t get close, how can I understand it?”
The Master said, “It’ s not a question of understanding or not understanding.
Understanding is delusion; not understanding is indif ference. But when you
reach the unattainable T ao, it is like pure space, limitless and serene. Where
is there room in it for yes or no?”
I alone don’ t care: If good happens, good; if bad happens, good.
I am like an idiot : First you erase the blackboard; then you can write
something new .
I am differ ent fr om or dinary people : I am more ordinary . When I am
hungry , I eat; when I am tired, I sleep; that’ s all. Pai-chang said,
After enlightenment one is still the same as one was before. One is
simply free from unreality and delusion. The ordinary person’ s mind
is the same as the sage’ s, because Original Mind is perfect and
complete in itself. After you have had this recognition, please don’ t
lose it.
CHAPTER 21
befor e time and space : Philo said, “T oday means boundless and
inexhaustible eternity . Months and years and all periods of time are
concepts of men, who gauge everything by number; but the true name of
eternity is T oday .”
CHAPTER 22If you want to become whole, etc. : Unless you accept yourself, you can’ t let
go of yourself.
Because he doesn’ t know who he is : From the standpoint of personality ,
he knows very well who he is; that is what allows him to use his personality
for people’ s benefit, rather than be used by it. But from the standpoint of his
true self, there is nowhere to stand and no self to know . He doesn’ t know;
he just is.
Only in being lived by the T ao: This is what Paul of T arsus meant by ,
“Not I, but Christ in me.” Or , in a more light-hearted vein, the little boy
who when his mother got annoyed and said “Stop sneezing!” answered,
“I’m not sneezing! It’s sneezing me!”
CHAPTER 23
trust your natural r esponses : Trust the intelligence of the body .
CHAPTER 24
power over others : The other is the self. When we understand this, we are
able to use power wisely .
CHAPTER 25
mother of the universe : As chapter 51 says, “The T ao gives birth to all
beings, / nourishes them, maintains them, / cares for them, comforts them,
protects them, / takes them back to itself.”
These ar e the four gr eat powers : Ho-hum.
CHAPTER 26without leaving home : She never loses touch with who she really is. In the
midst of joy or anger or sorrow , she remains imperturbable.
CHAPTER 27
This is one of the most important chapters in the T ao Te Ching.
First stanza: I have been very free here, because the central point—
openness to reality , openheartedness—needs to be made as clearly as
possible. The original text reads:
A good walker leaves no traces or tracks. A good speaker makes no
slips or errors. A good calculator needs no counting-sticks or tallies.
A good locksmith uses no bolts or keys, yet no one can open. A
good binder uses no ropes or cords, yet no one can loosen.
available to all people : Because he is not attached to his own ideas.
you will get lost : In moral judgments. The T ree of the Knowledge of
Good and Evil is the T ree of Death.
CHAPTER 28
Know the male, I yet keep to the female : Keeping to the receptive allows the
creative to arise. Actually , the creative and the receptive are complementary
sides of the same process.
CHAPTER 29
Do you want to impr ove the world : Ramana Maharshi said,
Wanting to reform the world without discovering one’ s true self is
like trying to cover the world with leather to avoid the pain ofwalking on stones and thorns. It is much simpler to wear shoes.
It can’ t be impr oved : This is the Sabbath mind, as in the first chapter of
Genesis: when God, from a state of perfect repose, looks at the world and
says, “Behold, it is very good.” Actually , this “it can’ t be improved” is the
greatest possible improvement. Compare chapter 35: “She perceives the
universal harmony , / even amid great pain, / because she has found peace in
her heart.”
CHAPTER 30
doesn’ t try to for ce issues : He lets the issues resolve themselves.
out of contr ol: Out of the control of his own, tiny , personal, conscious
self.
CHAPTER 31
Peace is his highest value : Peace means wholeness.
CHAPTER 32
Smaller than an electr on: Neither small nor lar ge. Neither here nor there.
Neither past nor future nor present. Also (as long as we’re discussing this)
all of the above.
CHAPTER 33
true wisdom : When I know myself, I know others. When I master myself, I
don’t need to master others.CHAPTER 34
it doesn’ t create them : It is more like a mother than like an artisan, giving
birth rather than making. It acts without any conscious plan or purpose. God
doesn’ t say, “Let there be light.” The light simply is, and is God.
CHAPTER 35
peace in her heart : She is centered in the peace; thus she can give herself
fully to the pain.
without flavor : Zen Master Seung Sahn’ s comment:
The Great W ay has no gate.
Clear water has no taste.
The tongue has no bone.
In complete stillness, a stone girl is dancing.
CHAPTER 36
If you want to shrink something : For example, defects in your character .
When suppressed or ignored, they continue; but when allowed to be present
in your awareness, they eventually wither away . Or, as Blake said from a
slightly dif ferent perspective, “The road of excess leads to the palace of
wisdom.”
CHAPTER 37
If powerful men and women / could center themselves in it : They can!CHAPTER 38
The Master does nothing : He has no goal in mind, doesn’ t think that he is
doing anything. He’ s just along for the ride.
yet he leaves nothing undone : No expectations. No regrets. No residue.
When the T ao is lost : You can never lose the T ao. But you can find it.
Therefore the Master concerns himself / with the depths and not the
surface : In the depths, there is no distinction between depths and surface.
Fruit in autumn, flowers in spring. He enjoys the flowers, as he enjoys the
fruit.
CHAPTER 39
lets himself be shaped by the T ao: As a piece of marble lets itself be shaped
by the sculptor , so that the statue inside can be revealed. Hammer and chisel
are necessary agents. Ouch.
CHAPTER 40
Being is born of non-being : “Non-being” means beyond the categories of
being and non-being.
CHAPTER 41
the gr eatest love seems indiffer ent: Because it has no preferences. A good
father loves all his children equally , whether they turn out to be thieves or
carpenters or messiahs. As Jesus of Nazareth said, “Love your enemies [i.e.,
treat them with generosity and compassion], so that you may be children of
your father in heaven: for he makes his sun rise on the evil and on the good,
and sends his rain on the just and on the unjust.”CHAPTER 42
The T ao gives birth to One : When it’ s called One, it is no longer the T ao.
(When it’ s called the T ao, it is no longer the T ao.)
One gives birth to T wo: Oy!
Two gives birth to Thr ee: Where will it end?
Three gives birth to all things : I knew it! Now once more from the top,
with feeling.
All things have their backs to the female, etc. : Literally , “The ten
thousand things carry [at their backs] the yin and embrace [in front] the
yang ; through the blending of the ener gy [chi] of these two, they achieve
harmony .”
Last stanza: I have improvised here. The text reads:
People hate to be orphans, widowers, starvelings. Y et kings and
princes take these names as their titles. Therefore sometimes you
gain by losing; sometimes you lose by gaining. What others have
taught, I teach also: ‘The violent will not die a natural death.’ I will
make this the father of my teaching.
CHAPTER 43
gentlest …/ hardest…: Examples: water and rock, love and hostility .
CHAPTER 44
Fame or integrity , etc. : But why be caught in these dichotomies? Once he
has surrendered to the T ao, the Master accepts whatever comes to him. If
fame comes, he uses it with integrity . If money comes, he uses it as pureenergy. Success and failure are equally irrelevant to him, because his heart
rests in the T ao.
CHAPTER 45
True perfection : A cracked cof fee cup. The sound of traf fic outside your
window .
True fullness : Attention, for example.
CHAPTER 46
Whoever can see thr ough all fear : This is the only real defense. President
Roosevelt said, “W e have nothing to fear but fear itself.” I would say , “Not
even that.”
CHAPTER 47
The mor e you know : The more you know without knowing yourself.
CHAPTER 48
every day something is dr opped : Gratefully .
True mastery can be gained : Actually , it can’ t be gained. T rue mastery
is letting things take their course.
CHAPTER 49
The Master has no mind of her own : She has a strong will and a strong
character , but she is permeable. And her mind is so subtle that, incomparison with the rigid thought-and desire-structures of other people, it
seems to be pure space.
She also trusts people who ar en’t trustworthy : Like a parent whose child
has broken a rule. Of course, if a parent is genuine, the child will be
genuine too.
CHAPTER 50
There are a number of passages in the T ao Te Ching where a much narrower
consciousness is at work than in the rest of the book. These passages may
be interpolations (several show a concern with immortality , as the later ,
magical T aoism did). Or perhaps the old fellow had indigestion on the days
he wrote them. But since my job was to re-create the essential mind of Lao-
tzu, I could not in good conscience include them in this version. What I
have done instead is to make improvisations on the passage’ s theme, always
taking care to remain within the consciousness and language of the main
body of the text. For those who are curious, I have included literal
translations in these notes.
The text here reads:
Coming in is life; going out is death. Three in ten are companions of
life; three in ten are companions of death. And three in ten are
moving from life to the place of death. Why is this? Because they
live life too intensely . I have heard that he who knows how to
preserve his life meets neither rhinoceros nor tiger when he travels
by land, and is untouched by the sword when he enters a battle. The
rhinoceros finds no place in him to drive its horn; the tiger finds no
place in him to sink its claws; the soldier finds no place in him to
thrust his sword. Why is this? Because in him there is no place of
death.
he has nothing left : Zen Master Seung Sahn’ s comment:Coming in emptyhanded,
going out emptyhanded.
What is your original face?
The moon is shining everywhere.
CHAPTER 51
spontaneously honors the T ao: Honoring the T ao means respecting the way
things are. There is a wonderful Japanese story (adapted here from Zenkei
Shibayama Roshi’ s A Flower Does Not T alk) which portrays this attitude:
A hundred and fifty years ago there lived a woman named Sono,
whose devotion and purity of heart were respected far and wide.
One day a fellow Buddhist, having made a long trip to see her ,
asked, “What can I do to put my heart at rest?” She said, “Every
morning and every evening, and whenever anything happens to you,
keep on saying, ‘Thanks for everything. I have no complaint
whatsoever .’” The man did as he was instructed, for a whole year ,
but his heart was still not at peace. He returned to Sono, crestfallen.
“I’ve said your prayer over and over , and yet nothing in my life has
changed; I’m still the same selfish person as before. What should I
do now?” Sono immediately said, “‘Thanks for everything. I have
no complaint whatsoever .’” On hearing these words, the man was
able to open his spiritual eye, and returned home with a great joy .
CHAPTER 52
trace back the manifestations : Where do you come from?
CHAPTER 53The gr eat W ay is easy : Zen Master Seng-ts’an said,
The great W ay is not dif ficult
if you don’ t cling to good and bad.
Just let go of your preferences:
and everything will be perfectly clear .
CHAPTER 54
genuine : The mark of a genuine person is straightforwardness. He has
nothing to hide, nothing to defend.
CHAPTER 55
like a newborn child : Chuang-tzu said,
The infant cries all day long without straining its throat. It clenches
its fist all day long without cramping its hand. It stares all day long
without weakening its eyes. Free from all worries, unaware of itself,
it acts without thinking, doesn’ t know why things happen, doesn’ t
need to know .
The Master ’s power is like this, etc. : I have improvised here. The text
reads:
To know harmony is to know the eternal; to know the eternal is to
have insight. T o improve upon life is ominous; to control the chi by
the mind is aggressiveness. When they are too aggressive, things
decay . This is non-T ao. Non-T ao soon ends.CHAPTER 56
Those who know don’ t talk . They don’ t talk for the sake of talking, or to
prove something, or to display themselves. They talk only if it’ s appropriate
(and if they feel like talking).
Those who talk don’ t know : This is ignorance, not the openness of not-
knowing.
CHAPTER 57
the world will govern itself : Just as Nature regulates itself, without any need
of our bright ideas.
CHAPTER 58
Second stanza: I have improvised here. The text reads:
Prosperity rests on disaster; disaster is hidden in prosperity . Who
knows the line that separates them? The normal becomes the
perverted, the good becomes the monstrous. People have long been
confused about this.
CHAPTER 59
I have improvised here. The text reads:
In governing people and serving heaven, nothing is better than
moderation. Only he who is moderate can prepare in advance. He
who prepares in advance accumulates a reserve of te [virtue or
power; the T ao as it informs things and acts in the world]. He who
accumulates a reserve of te overcomes all obstacles. He who
overcomes all obstacles has no limits. He who has no limits canpossess a country . He who possesses the mother of a country can
keep it for a long time. This is called having deep roots and a strong
stem, long life and enduring vision.
CHAPTER 60
step out of its way : It will be like a sword cutting the air . No harm.
CHAPTER 61
I have improvised here. The text reads:
A lar ge country is like the lower part of a river . It is the meeting-
point of the universe, the female of the universe. The female, by
tranquility , conquers the male. By tranquility she takes the lower
position. Therefore a lar ge country by placing itself in a lower
position can conquer a small country . A small country by being in a
lower position can conquer a lar ge country . Therefore the one
conquers by placing itself lower , the other conquers by being
naturally lower . A lar ge country wants nothing more than to gather
people and nourish them. A small country wants nothing more than
to enter and serve the people. Since both get what they want, the
large country should take the lower position.
CHAPTER 62
The T ao is the center of the universe : The center is everywhere.
the good man’ s treasur e: It is like the magic purse: he can spend it
freely , and there is always more.
the bad man’ s refuge : It doesn’ t judge him. Thus he can step outside his
idea of himself. There is always another chance.no one can achieve it : Because there is no “it.”
Offer instead / to teach him about the T ao: Better yet, don’t offer. The
Master simply responds to circumstances in the appropriate way . If the
president or the pope or a border guard has a question, he will be glad to
answer it. Otherwise, he minds his business and leaves everything to the
Tao.
CHAPTER 63
When she runs into a difficulty : A dif ficulty is like a letter with her address
on it.
CHAPTER 64
He car es about nothing but the T ao: Which is not to say that he doesn’ t love
his wife, children, friends, country , planet. But he sees them in the proper
perspective: of eternity . And since he and his wife love the T ao even more
than they love each other , their marriage is radiant with love. This is the
meaning of the Biblical verse “Y ou shall love the Unnamable your God
with all your heart, with all your soul, and with all your strength.”
CHAPTER 65
kindly taught them to not-know : The ancient Masters taught them the
supreme value of Don’ t-know Mind, which is forever fresh, open, and
fertile with possibilities. (Another name for it is Beginner ’s Mind.)
CHAPTER 66
The Master is above the people : Not that she feels superior , but that,
looking from a higher vantage point, she can see more.The whole world is grateful to her : Even those who think they are
ungrateful.
no one can compete with her : She sees everyone as her equal.
CHAPTER 67
Second stanza: I have improvised here. The text reads:
I have three treasures which I preserve and treasure. The first is
compassion, the second is frugality , the third is daring not to be first
in the world. Whoever has compassion can be brave. Whoever has
frugality can be generous. Whoever dares not to be first in the world
can become the leader of the world. But to be brave without
compassion, generous without frugality , prominent without
humility: this is fatal. Whoever shows compassion in battle will
conquer . Whoever shows compassion in defense will stand firm.
Heaven helps and protects those with compassion.
CHAPTER 68
I have improvised here. The text reads:
A skillful of ficer isn’ t warlike. A skillful fighter isn’ t violent. A
skillful conqueror isn’ t competitive. A skillful employer places
himself below others. This is called the te of not competing. This is
called the power to use men’ s abilities. This is called complying
with heaven. Since ancient times it has been the best way .
CHAPTER 69
Under estimating your enemy : Even thinking of him as an enemy is
dangerous. If you need a word, use “opponent.” May the best man (as theysay) win.
CHAPTER 70
easy to put into practice : Grasses and trees have no trouble with it; animals
are perfect disciples.
look inside your heart : And keep looking. Keep listening, too, until the
sights and the sounds disappear by themselves.
CHAPTER 71
First r ealize that you ar e sick : Novalis said, “W e are close to waking up
when we dream that we are dreaming.”
CHAPTER 72
Therefore the Master steps back : He doesn’ t act as guru or messiah, because
he doesn’ t want to keep people dependent on him, and thus spiritually
immature. When people start to treat him like a holy man, he nips their
adoration in the bud and points them to their inner messiah.
people will have nothing to learn : They just need to unlearn.
CHAPTER 73
The T ao is always at ease : At ease with herself, the Master puts everyone
else at ease.
CHAPTER 74Trying to contr ol the futur e: Thinking that you know what is good or bad,
what is advantageous or harmful. The Huai Nan Tzu  tells a story about this:
A poor farmer ’s horse ran of f into the country of the barbarians. All his
neighbors of fered their condolences, but his father said, “How do you know
that this isn’ t good fortune?” After a few months the horse returned with a
barbarian horse of excellent stock. All his neighbors of fered their
congratulations, but his father said, “How do you know that this isn’ t a
disaster?” The two horses bred, and the family became rich in fine horses.
The farmer ’s son spent much of his time riding them; one day he fell of f
and broke his hipbone. All his neighbors of fered the farmer their
condolences, but his father said, “How do you know that this isn’ t good
fortune?” Another year passed, and the barbarians invaded the frontier . All
the able-bodied young men were conscripted, and nine-tenths of them died
in the war . Thus good fortune can be disaster and vice versa. Who can tell
how events will be transformed?
CHAPTER 75
leave them alone : Offer them the gift of not being dependent on you.
CHAPTER 76
disciple of life : The less rigid, the readier for life or death.
CHAPTER 77
and doesn’ t think that she is better : She is simply more transparent.
CHAPTER 78he is people’ s greatest help : The greatest help is wholeheartedly trusting
people to resolve their own problems. A true philanthropist, like a good
parent, brings people to the point where they can help themselves.
True wor ds seem paradoxical : Only when the mind is cluttered with
untruth.
CHAPTER 79
If you blame someone else : Confucius said,
In the archer there is a resemblance to the mature person. When he
misses the mark, he turns and seeks the reason for his failure in
himself.
CHAPTER 80
without ever having gone to see it : Not that they are lacking in appropriate
curiosity . But they have their priorities straight.
CHAPTER 81
The Master has no possessions : These no-possessions may include a house,
a car, a computer , a roomful of books, and an electric toothbrush.
The mor e he does for others, / the happier he is : Because he is doing it
for himself.
The mor e he gives to others, / the wealthier he is : The less he holds on
to, the more he can give himself to others. When he can give himself
completely , his wealth is infinite.A c k n o w l e d g m e n t s
Lao Tzu: T ext, Notes, and Comments  by Ch’en Ku-ying (Chinese Materials
Center , 1981) furnished help on textual matters and commentaries. Of the
many translations that I consulted, Liou Kia-Hway’ s Tao Tö King
(Gallimard, 1967) was particularly useful. Occasionally I have borrowed a
phrase from the translation of Gia-fu Feng and Jane English (V intage,
1972).
John T arrant, Jane Hirshfield, Jacob Needleman, and Robert Aitken
Roshi read the manuscript and made helpful suggestions.
For his considerable share in the making of this book, I would like to
express my deep gratitude to that prince among agents, my friend Michael
Katz.About the Translator
Stephen Mitchell  has written extensively about spirituality , drawing from
both Eastern and W estern traditions. He is a poet and one of the world’ s
preeminent translators — of Rilke; Psalms; Genesis; Job; of Y ehuda
Amichai; the Bhagavad Gita; T ao Te Ching; and of other essential works.
He is the author of the bestselling and critically acclaimed novel Meetings
with the Ar changel ; the editor of such collections as The Enlightened Mind
(sacred prose) and The Enlightened Heart (sacred poetry). His books for
children include The W ishing Bone and Other Poems ; The Cr eation ; The
Nightingale . Stephen Mitchell’ s The Gospel Accor ding to Jesus , from
which his Jesus: What He Really Said and Did  is derived, is one of the
definitive and most-heralded books on the Jesus of history and of faith.
Please visit www .stephenmitchellbooks.com and sign up for breaking news
about Stephen Mitchell at www .AuthorT racker .com.C r e d i t s
Cover design © 1999 by David BullenC o p y r i g h t
TAO TE CHING.  Copyright © 1988 by Stephen Mitchell. All rights reserved under International and
Pan-American Copyright Conventions. By payment of the required fees, you have been granted the
non-exclusive, non-transferable right to access and read the text of this e-book on-screen. No part of
this text may be reproduced, transmitted, down-loaded, decompiled, reverse engineered, or stored in
or introduced into any information storage and retrieval system, in any form or by any means,
whether electronic or mechanical, now known or hereinafter invented, without the express written
permission of HarperCollins e-books.
EPub Edition © JUL Y 2004 ISBN: 9780061807398 
About the Publisher
Australia
HarperCollins Publishers (Australia) Pty . Ltd.
25 R yde Road (PO Box 321)
Pymble, NSW 2073, Australia
http://www .harpercollinsebooks.com.au
Canada
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.
55 A venue Road, Suite 2900
Toronto, ON, M5R, 3L2, Canada
http://www .harpercollinsebooks.ca
New Zealand
HarperCollinsPublishers (New Zealand) Limited
P.O. Box 1
Auckland, New Zealand
http://www .harpercollinsebooks.co.nz
United Kingdom
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.
77-85 Fulham Palace Road
London, W6 8JB, UK
http://www .harpercollinsebooks.co.uk
United States
HarperCollins Publishers Inc.10 East 53rd Street
New Y ork, NY 10022
http://www .harpercollinsebooks.com